=== Beginner's Guide ===

Keine - 'What? You're starting off with this mod without having played the
original Hengband? Very well, I understand, calm down. I'll teach you.

This file is /lib/help/instruction_en.txt.
It might be a good idea to open it in Notepad and place it to the side of the
game window as you play the game.

You can change the game window size by dragging the border with mouse.
This mod might be difficult to play with default window size, so it's a good
idea to make it bigger.

Anyway, let's start with the Warrior class.
In early game, warriors fight essentialy by holding down arrow keys, so
you'll be able to learn the basic game controls.

Oni, WhiteWolf-Tengu, Celestials, Shinigami and Great-Youkai are strong
races that are easy to use. If you want to play as a Touhou character, then
Youmu, Tewi, Yuuka, Momiji, Eiki, Tenshi and Clownpiece are easy for beginners
to handle.

Aim for around 20 bonus points.
You can reroll bonus points by pressing ESC at the allocation screen and then
pressing 'r'. Allocate points in strength, dexterity and constitution; if you
put those stats over 20, you might allocate the rest in charisma.
If you set the 'Fixed amount of bonus points' option to 'on', you'll always
get 20 bonus points to allocate, making it less annoying.

Now, that the game has started, do you see those colorful symbols that make up
the 'town'? This is the game screen. Old computer games before NES era looked
like this. This is the Human Village of Gensoukyou. The '@' symbol close to
the entrance is you.

This game doesn't work with controllers like gamepads.
All command are performed with keyboard.
There's around a hundred of different commands in total, but at first, let's
learn the basic list of commands required to progressing to around dungeon
level 20. You can look for other commands through a window you open by
pressing Enter. You'll be using them often, so try and remember them.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  
  Enter         Lets you pick a command from a command window

  Arrow keys    Move the '@'. If there's an enemy in the way, attack it.
  Shift + arrow keys    Makes you run in that direction until you hit an
                        obstacle. Doesn't work if Numlock is on.
  Ctrl + arrow keys     Attacks in that direction without trying to move.
  5     Stand still and do nothing.
        You can use it for resting while you wait for nearby monsters to
        come closer
  s     Search your surroundings. Detects hidden doors, traps on the floor and
        traps on nearby chests on the floor. If your Searching skill is too
        low, you might fail to find anything even after searching for a while.
  <     Go up a staircase. If used on surface, switches to global map mode.
  >     Go down a staircase. If used in global map mode, moves to normal map.

  g (get)       Pick up an item beneath your feet.
  d (drop)      Drop an item on floor.
  e (equip)     Display your current equipment.
  i (inventory) Display your inventory.
  w (wield)     Wield/wear an item.
  t (takeoff)   Take off a piece of equipment.

  E (eat)       Eat some food. If you don't have food, buy some from the '1'
                shop in Human Village.
  q (quaff)     Quaff a potion. Don't carelessly drink unknown potions.
  r (read)      Read a scroll. You can't read if you're confused, blind, or
                in a non-illuminated area.
  F (fuel)      Refuels your lantern with oil.
                If your lantern runs out of fuel during your dungeon trip,
                you won't be able to see anything; this is very dangerous.
  a,z,u         Uses a wand/rod/staff. You might fail to use the device.
  (aim,zap,use) I can't recommend carelessly using unknown items.

  o (open)      Open a door or a chest. If it's locked, you automatically
                attempt to unlock it.
  c (close)     Closes a door.
  D (disarm)    Disarm a trap on floor/chest. If your disarming skill is low,
                you might fail and trigger the trap instead.

  J (Job skill) Uses special abilities of your class. Some classes don't have
                special abilities.
  U (Use Special Skill)     Uses racial/mutation special abilities.
                For example, Tewi and Momiji can use their keen hearing to
                detect nearby monsters.
  
  l (look)      Look around.
                If you press '*' or arrow keys after using this command, you
                can move the cursor around. If you point it at a monster and
                press 'r', it will display information you know about that
                monster at this point.
  C (Character) Browse player info.
                You can switch to other information screens by pressing 'h'
                after using this command.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the minimum list of commands you'll need.

  After the game has started, let's set up some options first.
Open the options menu with '=' command, then press 'H' and 5.
This will give you a warning once your HP falls below 50%.
Go back with ESC, then press 'D' and 1 or 2.
This will display the trajectory of spells cast by enemies.

  Next, let's prepare your equipment with money you currently have.
-Buy a lantern and flasks of oil at the '1' store.
-Buy body armor/cap/shoes/cloak at '2' store (you probably won't 
 need a shield)
-Buy Scrolls of Teleportiation at '5' store;
 If they're selling Scrolls of Monster Confusion, buy some, and if you have
 spare money, buy Scroll of Word of Recall
-If a Ring of Warning is being sold at '6' store, buy one
-Buy some Potions of Cure Serious Wounds at '4' store with your 
 remaining money
If the stores aren't selling items you want, spend some time so that they'll
restock. You can spend it by resting at the inn.

If you're playing as Youmu, take off one of your katanas and fight with
holding one with both of your hands. In early game, you'll hardly hit anything
while dual-wielding.
If you're playing as Tewi, you start out with a large sum of money. Go to
whatever stores you like and buy items that look strong. Tewi's probably the
strongest in early game.

  Once you've done shopping, let's go to a dungeon.
Press '<' to switch to global map view; there's Myouren Temple slightly to
the right and bottom of '@'. You can get ambushed by monsters while you walk
around on global map, returning you to normal map view, but the character
you've made shouldn't have problems with this. If your HP gets low, drink a
healing potion or escape with a teleportation scroll. If you reach the edge of
the map, you can go to the neighbouring map area; once you return, all the
enemies will be gone.

  Once you arrive at Myouren Temple, press '>' to return to normal map.
See this purple '>' in top-right area of the map? This is the entrance to
Hall of Dreams' Great Mausoleum. It's a beginner dungeon where strong enemies
hardly appear. It's a good idea to go here to learn basics of combat and
exploration. The symbols in the dungeon are mainly terrain and items, the
alphabet characters are mainly monsters. Use 'l' command and move the cursor
to examine them.

If you find a white worm mass (white 'w'), that's your chance to grind some
experience. Stand at the room entrance and keep swinging your sword with
Ctrl + arrow key; you'll keep defeating the multiplying worm masses. You
probably can reach around level 6 with this method.

  You'll probably find a lot of items with unkown effects like 'Red Potion' 
or 'Scroll labeled '******''. Also, if you attempt to equip weapon/armor you
find, they might end up being cursed. 
You can learn more about items with 'identification'.
You can identify items at Hieda House in Human Village (center-top area).
It costs $25.
You also might find items with a slightly odd name like 'Pair of Leather Boots
of Fairy'. Those are ego-items. Use them well.
You can perform detailed identification at Scarlet Devil Mansion or Kourindou
to learn everything about their special effects.

  Well, now that's you're around level 6, let's take on a quest.
Pick 'q) Quest' at the Hieda House in Human Village; you'll be asked to drive
out some bandits. If you go to the top-left area of Human Village, you'll
discover a new staircase there; if you enter it, you'll start the fight with
the group of bandits.
You shouldn't lose this fight at your current level.
If you get in trouble, try reading a Scroll of Monster Confusion. It will make
your next melee attack confuse the enemy. It's a simple way of dealing with
most of early game enemies.

Once you've defeated them all, a message will appear reporting the quest being
completed. Go back to Hieda House and report, finishing the quest and turning
that building into your exploration base where you can place your items.
(The entrance is where you put up items to decorate your house. If you put an
item here, you won't be able to get it back, so be careful)

Basically, that's the early game pattern.
After that, explore deeper into Hall of Dreams' Great Mausoleum, travel to
distant locations like Angband or Genbu Lake, clear other quests, raise your
level, prepare your equipment and remember how to use different items.
If you want to go deeper below dungeon level 20, you'll want free action,
fire resistance, and the ability to see invisible. Check the other help files
for more details.

If you read a Scroll of Word of Recall in a dungeon, it will return you to
the surface after a slight delay. If you pick 'Recall to dungeon' at the
Divine Shrine Mausoleum Branch Office in the Human Village, it'll send you to
the deepest dungeon level you've reached up to this point.

If the game is hard for you, feel free to pick the 'Munchkin' personality
or play on Easy difficulty.
Good luck.'