***** <Energy>
=== About Movement Order ===
Keine - 'Let's start with explaining movement order.
One of specific features of roguelike games is 'You and enemies take turns
performing actions'. However, that's not quite the case with Hengband.
While you still can take any amount of time thinking once it's your turn to
act, there's no guarantee that two beings with the same speed will always
take turns one after another.

Let's go a bit deeper into the details.
All characters, including you, have to wait for some time before taking
their next turn once they've performed an action. That amount of time is
calculated using 'energy consumption amount' and 'speed', with a random number
being applied on top of that.

Amount of energy consumed depends on the action you just performed. Most
of the actions use up the same amount of energy, but some use up a different
amount. Actions like 'drop an item', 'shoot/throw at high speed', 'stop
movement after receiving a warning' use very little time before next action.

Next up is speed; of course, having higher speed means waiting less time for
your next action. At +10 you perform actions twice as fast, at +20 you perform
actions three times as fast. However, at +30 doesn't make you four times as
quick. Around +25, the effect of speed starts to diminish; the difference
between +40 and +50 is hardly noticeable.

And then, you add in a random number; usually this doesn't do too much, but at
times, it can have a surprisingly significant impact. There are cases of
enemies at +10 speed taking multiple turns while the player was at +30 speed.

It is argued where this mechanic is thrilling or just harmful for strategic
combat, but that's the system used to determine move order in Hengband.
It's less about pulling through battles with all of your strength and more
about always being prepared to fight in top condition.

Also, non-unique monsters can have variance in their speed up to +/- 50%.
If you want a follower for riding, aim for a fast one.'

***** <Meleeweapon>
=== About Weapon Combat ===

Keine - 'Now, let's talk about attacking adjacent monsters in melee.
I've said it several times; by using movement commands to move into an
adjacent monsters, you automatically attack this monster. Let's talk about
fighting in melee with weapons like swords or spears.

With one command input, you perform several weapon attacks.
Amount of blows depends on your class, strength, dexterity, weapon weight,
and possibly extra blows modifiers from your equipment.
Each class has a maximum limit on attacks per round.
Holding a weapon with both hands makes it easier to get extra attacks.
You can't hold a short blade with both hands, but you get a bonus to
blows per round once your proficiency becomes high enough.

Attack accuracy depends on various factors.
First of all, high level enemies and enemies with high AC are harder to hit.
Melee-focused races, classes, personalities are better at landing hits.
High strength and dexterity makes you more accurate.
As you level up, your accuracy increases, but this increment greatly depends
on your class.
And of course, your weapon or other pieces of equipment might have accuracy
modifiers, changing your ability to land hits.
Some temporary effects or negative conditions might affect it further.
Ultimately, your accuracy is linked to your total damage; you shouldn't
neglect it.

Each attack's power depends on weapon power and equipment modifiers.
If you have high strength, it will increase damage dealt.
A major factor is your weapon's elemental brands/slays and how they interact
with the enemy you're hitting. If you wish to know more about brands/slays,
check out the items help section.

You can check your base weapon attack power with 'C' command, and learn
more details including slay effectiveness at a blacksmith.'

--- Dual Wielding ---

Keine - 'You can hold two weapons at once, one in each hand. The attack
power will be equal to those two weapons combined. It looks strong it first,
but there's a catch. If you dual-wield, you get a very large penalty to
accutacy. If enemy AC is high and you're not proficient enough, you'll hardly
be able to land a hit.

Warriors and Samurai have high aptitude for dual-wielding, so they might
pick this option. Some equipment might have an ability that reduces dual
wielding penalties; that's another way to get around this.

***** <Shootingweapon>
=== About Ranged Attacks ===

Keine - 'Now, let's talk about using bows and crossbows.
In original Hengband, you had a separate equipment slot for using a ranged
weapon, but in this mod, you have to hold them in your hands. They're mainly
held with both hands. You can hold a shield or a melee weapon in other hand,
but this will give you penalties to accuracy and amount of shots per round.

Shooting is performed with 'f' command. After using it, pick ammo you want
to use, then choose your target to perform the attack.
If you pick up the arrow you've shot you can use it again, but the ammo you
use might break and disappear.

Since it takes time to input commands every time you want to shoot, people
usually use macros for that. Macros will be described in more details in
another section.

Shooting attack power mainly depends on bow and arrow quality.
If you're holding a bow, arrows should display their attack power in format
like ([single shot power]/[total power per round]).
Accuracy is calculated in a way similar to melee attacks, only it depends
on your ranged combat skill.
Crossbows have somewhat better accuracy compared to bows.
You can check your accuracy and amount of shots per round with 'C' command.

Amount of shots per round is treated in a very different manner compared
to amount of blows in melee.
In close combat, you perform several attacks in a single action; when 
shooting, each attack consumes only (base energy consumption/shots per round)
energy of base consumption amount.
For example, if you perform 4 shots per round, you will perform each shot
spending only 1/4 as much energy compared to a normal action.
This feature makes ranged combat very advantageous compared to melee combat.

As it was explained earlier, movement order in Hengband isn't fixed.
A major cause of defeat on lower levels is enemies unexpectedly performing
multiple attacks in a row.
Even if your HP is above 800, if an enemy takes several turns in a row and
uses a powerful breath attack or spell, it's game over.
It's one of Hengband's unreasonable moments rarely seen in other roguelikes.
However, if you're shooting when you have many shots per round, enemies will
be less likely to get several turns to attack you.

If you've gotten used to the game and aim to clear it, I can recommend a
class proficient with bows like Ranger or Marksman. Even on lower levels, it's
a comparatively safe way of combat.'

***** <Martialarts>
=== About Martial Arts ===

Keine - 'Martial arts refers to attacking with your bare hands - that is,
without having a melee weapon equipped. Original Hengband had only some 
classes being capable at martial arts, but in this mod, any class can fight
in this manner.

Amount of blows per round for martial arts mainly depends on your level,
dexterity, and martial art proficiency. Those who have high aptitude for
martial arts have a high upper limit on blows per round as well.
Of course, 'extra blows' abilities on your equipment also affect the amount
of blows per round you perform.

Martial art power depends, first of all, on your strength, then the damage
modifiers on your equipment are taken into account.
After that, it depends on kind of martial art attack you're doing.
Martial arts have varied means of attack like 'punch', 'kick', 'scratch'.
Each of them has its own damage and extra effects; if you manage to use
a powerful attack several times, damage you deal will increase.
The kind of attacks you'll be using depends mainly on your level, race and
class. For example, if you're an oni, you will use more powerful punch
attacks. Merfolk also can deal major damage by striking with their tails.
If you grow horns/tail from getting a mutation, you'll be able to use them
in martial art combat as well.
Also, transforming yourself with special spells changes your martial arts
corresponding to your new form.

You can confirm martial art power with 'C' command, but since martial art
calculation is fairly complex, it'll give you a sample value instead of a
proper expected amount of damage dealt.
Each time you use 'C' command, the displayed value of your martial art
power will be changed; that's a feature.'

--- Extra martial art attacks during weapon combat ---

Keine - 'You also can perform martial art combat as you fight in melee with
a weapon. It occurs if you have a tail/horns and your martial art proficiency
is high enough, or if you're holding a shield and you shield proficiency is
high enough.
You'll be able to occasioanlly perform additional martial art attacks as you
fight with your weapon. If you're holding a staff weapon with both of your
hands, extra martial art attacks are more likely to occur.'

***** <Throwing>
=== About Throwing ===

Keine - 'You can attack by throwing items at enemies.
If your throwing proficiency is high enough, you'll be able to do it faster
compared to performing a normal action.

Aside from melee weapons, thrown items generally don't have much powers.
One of exceptions are special potions like Potion of Detonations.

You throwing range isn't long, and you won't be able to throw items far away
if your strength is low.
Throwing power depends on item kind, weapon brand/slay interaction with the
enemy being hit, and your strength.
If you use a 'Mighty Throw' spell or wear a Ring of Mighty Throw, your throw
power will increase.

Accuracy depends on your throwing proficiency, ranged combat skill, and
dexterity.
A thrown potion will always break, applying its effect.
Thrown non-artifact weapon can occasionally break and disappear.

Don't forget that some weapons like knives or javelins are 'suitable for
throwing'.
They have higher accuracy and increased power when thrown.
Artifacts in particular can be very powerful in this regard.
Some ego-items and artifacts can be suitable for throwing, even if their
base item isn't.
Also, there are only few of them, but there are weapons that come back when
thrown. However, they might not always come back, and even if they come back,
you might fail to catch them, and they'll drop beneath your feet. Success
rate depends on your dexterity.

Any classes can use throwing to some extent, but there are only few classes
that are proficient at it.'

***** <Critical>
=== About Critical Hits ===

Keine - 'All of those various attacks described above can deal critical hits.
A critical hit deals more damage, particularly affecting the damage dice part.
Basically, the more heavy your weapon is, the more critical hits you get.'

***** <Buff>
=== About Temporary Effects ===

Keine - 'It's reckless to fight powerful enemies without preparations.
In Hengband, there are various means of raising your power.
Here's a list of some basic ones. Many of them can be obtained through
potions or spells.

- Heroism
  Raises your spirits. Increases HP and AC by 10, and slightly increases
  melee accuracy. Cures 'terrified' condition, and makes you resistant to
  fear. Can be obtained by using potions or spells, or by drinking sake.
  However, your can get sick from drinking too much alcohol.

- Blessing
  You become blessed by some deity, though you're not certain which one.
  Increases AC by 10 and slightly increases melee accuracy.
  In this mod, it also slightly increases protection from magic.
  Can be obtained by using blessing spells or Scroll of Holy Chant.
  The scrolls are being sold at stores; buy some if you have spare money.

- Resist Fire/Cold/Electricity/Acid/Poison
  Makes you temporarily resistant to an element.
  Reduces damage received from basic elements and poison to 1/3.
  I've already explained this many times, but since it's so important, let's
  go over it again. If you gain a temporary resistance while already being
  resistant to that element from your equipment, you will become 'double
  resistant', reducing damage to 1/9 of its base value.
  However, this applies only to the base elements and poison.
  There are spells that give temporary resistance to elements like chaos or
  nether, but they can't give you a double resistance.

  Temporary resistance is mainly obtained through spells or potions.
  If your class can't use resistance spells, look for Potions of Resistance
  in the Pawn Shop.

- Hand of Confusion
  Your hands will start glowing once you read a Scroll of Monster Confusion.
  If you hit an enemy in this state, that enemy can get confused.
  Many powerful enemies in early game are vulnerable to confusion, so don't
  hesitate to use it. That being said, it becomes far less effective past
  midgame.

- Haste
  Increases speed by +10. Vital when facing against powerful enemies.
  Potions of Speed are comparatively easy to obtain from the early game.
  If possible, get yourself a Staff of Speed.
  There also are some spells that temporarily increase your speed.

- Empowerment
  Obtained through some physical augmentation spells. Increases your base
  parameters. The normal limit for your stats is 40, but there are some
  powerful spells that can go beyond that limit.

Those are basic temporary effects. In this mod, there's over a hundred of
different temporary effects in total.'

***** <BadStatus>
=== About Bad Status Conditions ===

Keine - 'You may get temporarily impaired by some enemy attacks.
Let's go over those conditions.
Many of them go away once enough time passes, but I'll also tell you how to
quickly cure them.

- Poison
  Makes you unable to regenerate HP and MP, and deals damage over time.
  Can be cured with Potions of Cure Poison, Potions of Cure Critical Wounds,
  and Potions of Healing.
  If you resist poison, you can't be poisoned.

- Fear
  If you're terrified, you can't attack enemies in melee.
  In this mod, it also increases spell failure rate and reduces ranged attack
  accuracy.
  Can be cured by drinking a potion with heroism effect or drinking sake.
  If you resist fear, you can't be terrified.

- Confusion
  You start moving in random directions.
  Also, you can't use spells or special abilities, can't read scrolls,
  and are likely to fail to activate magic devices like staves.
  Can be cured with Potions of Cure Serious Wounds or higher equivalent,
  and being resistant to confusion protects you from it.

- Blindness
  Makes you unable to see your surroundings.
  You won't be able to use scrolls or spellbooks.
  Also, you can't use items lying beneath your feet.
  You won't forget map layout you've learned up to this point, and you
  still can sense enemies with telepathy.
  Can be cured with Potions of Cure Serious Wounds or higher equivalent,
  and being resistant to blindness protects you from it.

- Paralysis
  Should be self explanatory. Makes you unable to move for several turns,
  and is likely to lead to a game over if it lasts for too long.
  Having free action protects you from paralyzing attacks, but you still
  can get paralyzed by fainting from lack of food or failing to break down
  a door.

- Hallucination
  You start seeing weird things.
  You'll be unable to properly perceive monsters and items.
  However, for some reason, you still can use scrolls and spellbooks.
  Curing hallucinations requires special means like Potions or Staves 
  of Curing, and it might take a while for it to go away on its own.
  Being resistant to chaos protects you from hallucinating.

- Slowness
  Reduces your speed by -10. It's dangerous to keep fighting in this state.
  This effect and 'Haste' neutralize each other.

- Statue
  Same as paralysis, except it ignores free action.
  Can be rarely inflicted by Ancient Foul Curse or blood curse.
  If your protection from magic is high enough, you'll be able to resist it.

- Stat drain
  Some enemy attacks can temporarily reduce your primary stats.
  They won't recover by themselves as time passes, you have to restore them
  with Potions of Restore [stat].
  If your stat is sustained, it protects that stat from being drained.
  However, time element attacks can drain stats even you have them sustained
  unless you resist time.

- Experience drain
  Your experience can be reduced by nether or chaos element attacks, or by
  melee attacks that drain experience. It might end up reducing your character
  level as well.
  You don't recover experience as time passes; drinking a Potion of Restore
  Life Levels will give you back your drained experience.
  If you resist nether, amount of experience you lose will be greatly reduced.

- Wounds
  Deals damage over time.
  You can get wounded by enemy attacks, curses, or shard element attacks;
  if your wounds are too severe, you might end up taking 100 damage or more.
  Can be healed with potions. Potions of Cure Critical Wounds or higher
  equivalents instantly cure any wounds.
  You can't get resistance to this effect, but some races like Golems, Ghosts
  or Tsukumogami can't be wounded.

- Stunning
  Increases spell failure rate.
  You can get stunned by enemy attacks, or sound/water/plasma element attacks.
  Stunning can get more severe, and if you get stunned hard enough, you'll be
  knocked out, making you collapse on the spot.
  Naturally, you'll still keep being attacked after that, making a game over
  almost certain.
  Potions of Cure Serious Wounds or higher equivalents cure stunning.
  Resistance to sound/water prevents you from being stunned by those attacks.
  There's no resistance to getting stunned by enemy melee attacks, but Golems
  can't be stunned at all.

Potions of Cure Critical Wounds recover you health somewhat and cure a lot
of bad status effects. If you have enough money, carrying dozens of those
with you won't be an overkill.'

***** <Attack_type>
=== About Elements ===

Keine - 'Spells and abilities in Hengband use various elements.
Let's go over elements that will be mainly used by enemy attacks.
I may repeat something I've already explained during talking about monster
special abilities and resistances, but it's very important, so let's examine
it once more.

- Acid
  Attacks with strong acid, can be resisted.
  Can damage your equipped armor and melt staves and scrolls in your backpack.
  Having double resistance or immunity further reduces the damage received and
  protects your items.
  If acid damages your armor, you take slightly less damage.

- Lightning
  Attacks with electricity, can be resisted.
  Can destroy rings or wands in your inventory.
  Having double resistance or immunity further reduces the damage received and
  protects your items.

- Fire
  Attacks with fire, can be resisted.
  Can burn up staves or scrolls in your inventory.
  Having double resistance or immunity further reduces the damage received and
  protects your items.

- Cold
  Attacks with cold, can be resisted.
  Can break potions in your inventory.
  Having double resistance or immunity further reduces the damage received and
  protects your items.

- Poison
  Attacks with poison; can poison you.
  If you have poison resistance, you take less damage and won't be poisoned.
  Having double resistance further reduces the damage received.

- Water
  Attacks with torrents and globes of water, can be resisted.
  If you get hit without being resistant, you get stunned, and your potions
  might get shattered.

- Holy
  Attacks with holy energy; being resistant can reduce the damage by half.
  If your race is vulnerable to holy attacks (like youkai or undead), you
  take more damage.

- Light
  Attacks with high-density rays of light. Can make you go blind.
  You take less damage and don't get blinded if you resist light.

- Darkness
  Attacks with mysterious power of darkness. Can make you go blind.
  You take less damage and don't get blinded if you resist darkness.

- Shards
  Attacks with solid objects flying at high speed.
  If you get hit, you get wounded, and your potions might get shattered.
  If you resist shards, you take less damage, don't get wounded, and your
  potions are mostly safe from being broken.

- Sound
  Attacks with a shockwave. Can stun you and shatter your potions.
  If you resist sound, you take less damage, and your potions won't get
  shattered.
  Sound resistance also prevents you from getting stunned by some elements,
  including sound.

- Nether
  Attacks with power of deaths. Frequently used by undead.
  If you get hit by it, you will temporarily lose part of your experience,
  which might lower your level.
  If you resist nether, you take less damage and lose less experience.

- Chaos
  Attacks with primordial chaos energy, or something like that.
  If you get hit by it, bad things will happen: you get confused, lose 
  experience, start hallucinating, gain mutations, and your items might get
  destroyed.
  Resisting confusion will prevent confusion, experience loss can be reduced
  with nether or chaos resistance, resisting chaos prevents hallucinations and
  mutations.
  Chaos resistance also protects items from being destroyed, but it's not
  guaranteed to work.
  That's a very nasty element.

- Disenchantment
  Attacks will special energy that drains mana.
  If you get hit by it, quality of your equipment will be reduced, and even
  artifacts can get disenchanted.
  If you resist disenchantment, you take less damage and your items won't get
  disenchanted.

- Plasma
  A high-temperature electric attack.
  Treated as combination of fire and lightning. Also, unless you resist sound,
  you will get stunned.

- Nuclear Heat
  An attack that is half fire and half light. Resisting fire and/or light will
  reduce damage you take.

- Pollution
  An attack that is half poison and half disenchantment. Both elemental
  resistances will be applied.

- Tornado
  Attacks with fiercely swirling winds. Can blow you away and shatter your
  potions. There's no specific resistance against this element; instead, if
  you're carrying enough weight, you won't get blown away and will take far
  less damage. If you're levitating, you still get blown away, but you take
  somewhat less damage, and your potions won't shatter.

- Gravity
  Attacks by creating a gravitational field.
  If you get hit, you get teleported, stunned, slowed down, and your potions
  might shatter.
  If you resist time, you take less damage and won't receive the additional
  effects. Even if you don't have time resistance, having levitation will
  mostly protect you from additional effects.

- Time
  Lowers your parameters by making time flow back.
  If you get hit, your stats and experience will be greatly drained.
  This effect ignores stat sustains and nether resistance.
  If you resist time, those effects won't be applied.

- Nexus
  Attacks by interfering with laws of space-time or something like that;
  it's a weird and powerful attack.
  It might teleport you somewhere, might cause mutations, and if you're
  particularly unlucky, it might shuffle your stats.
  If you resist time, you take less damage, and those weird effects won't
  be applied. Time resistance is difficult to acquire, but, fortunately,
  there are only few enemies that use nexus attacks.

- Inertia
  Attacks by slowing down your movements.
  If you get hit, you will temporarily slow down (speed -10).
  If you're hasted, those two effects will negate each other.
  You can't resist this element, but it doesn't deal that much damage.

- Ki
  Attacks by using life energy.
  Cannot be resisted, and will stun you unless you resist sound.

- Mana
  Attacks with pure mana.
  Cannot be resisted.

- Disintegration
  A powerful attack that disintegrates matter.
  Cannot be resisted.

- Meteor
  Attacks with a lot of fast-flying objects. Can burn items in your inventory
  or shatter your potions.
  Cannot be resisted, but being resistant to shards will protect your items
  from destruction with high probability.

- Psycho-Spear
  Attacks with powerful condensed mental power.
  Cannot be resisted, and ignores any defenses like magic armor, wraithform or
  invulnerability.

- Hellfire
  Extremely dangerous attack. Cannot be resisted, and will deal damage to any
  race. If you're a Celestial, Lunarian or Moon-Rabbit, you will take more
  damage.
  There are very few enemies that can use this attack.

Again, it's essential that you avoid fighting enemies who can use attacks
you don't resist.'

***** <Weak_point>
=== About Vulnerabilities ===

Keine - 'You might be vulnerable to some elements.

A typical one is vulnerability to holy energy.
Many youkai have it, and they take +33% damage from holy attacks.
Undead/demon races take +66% damage.
If you're studying magic realms of Darkness or Necromancy, you take
+25%~+33% extra damage.
For example, if Remilia would study Darkness realm, she'd receive double
damage from holy attacks.
If you lack resistance on lower levels, you might get one-shotted by shrine
maidens or silver wyrms.

There are other vulnerabilities; Cirno and Letty are weak to fire, Tsukumogami
and Youkai-Dolls are weak to disenchantment.
Those vulnerabilities will be highlighted in red on the resistance screen in
'C' command.
However, you have to use trial and error to figure out exactly how much extra
damage you take.
Do your best to avoid enemies that use elements you are vulnerable to.'

***** <Tactics1>
=== Early Game Tactics ===

Keine - 'Now, let's introduce some effective combat tactics to match your
current exploration level. First of all, let's talk about early game tactics,
covering around up to dungeon level 20'.

--- Digging ---
Keine - 'Are you concerned about money in early game?
If that's the case, it's a good idea to get a pick and start mining.
Purchase a Pick from General Store and Scrolls of Treasure Detection from the
Scroll Store. It's a bit expensive, but you also can buy a Staff of Treasure
Detection from Magic Store.
Then, enter the first level of a nearby dungeon (like the cave at Myouren
Temple), and once you see treasure veins in the walls, use Treasure Detection.
You'll probably discover many buried treasures around there.
Equip your pick and tunnel with 'T' command to excavate treasure.
You can collect several thousands if you keep doing this for a while.
However, don't forget about nearby monsters. If white mice start multiplying,
you'll be in trouble.'

--- Beneficial Effects in Early Game ---
Keine - 'In early game, while you still don't have good equipment available,
even monsters that are slightly stronger than usual can be powerful enemies.
Here's several methods to gain advantage in early game:

- Scrolls of Holy Chant
  If you read it, you become blessed, raising your defense and accuracy.
  They're sold in stores.
- Scrolls of Monster Confusion
  If you read it, you'll confuse an enemy with your next physical attack.
  It's effective against most of early game monsters. The scrolls are sold
  in stores.
- Sake and other alcohol
  If you drink it, you become heroic, raising your defense, accuracy,  HP,
  and making you resistant to fear.
  However, it's dangerous to drink too much.
  In particular, if you find some very strong alcohol that's not available in
  stores, you should refrain from drinking it.
- Potions of Speed
  It's your trump card in early game. If you drink it, you'll start moving
  twice as fast.
  They're not being sold in usual potion stores, but are occasionally
  available in Pawn Shop.
  Since quite a few of those are lying around on dungeon floor, it's a good
  idea to bring scrolls or staves of Object Detection with you.'

--- Crossbows ---
Keine - 'If you're not good at physical combat and don't have powerful spells,
I can recommend using a crossbow.
It's comparatively easy to land a hit with a crossbow even if your skill is
low. If you use Scrolls of Phase Door to keep your distance, you should be
able to comfortably fight strong enemies.
That being said, that tactic is mainly for pushing through early game.'

--- Teleport Away ---
Keine - 'Let me teach you about the most powerful spell in Hengband.
It's called 'Teleport Away'.
If you use a 'Wand of Teleport Away', a beam will shoot out, forcibly
teleporting any monsters that get hit.
It'll help you a lot in avoiding unnecessary battles along the whole game.
However, it doesn't work too well against enemies with teleportation
resistance, and doesn't affect unique monsters with teleportation resistance
at all.'

***** <Tactics2>
=== Midgame Tactics ===
Keine - 'Midgame generally refers to dungeon levels 30-60.
The specific individualities of each class become apparent at this point.
While you start obtaining better equipment, you also have to cover more
resistances; setting up a proper combination of items can be difficult.'

--- Tunnelling Tactics ---
Keine - 'You're not reckless enough to keep fighting while being
surrounded by strong enemies in an open area, right?
While the basic tactic is to retreat into a corridor and fight them one by
one, the enemies from behind still will be using spells and breath attacks.
In this case, dig a zig-zagging corridor with a Wand of Stone to Mud.
Like this:

######
#@#Z#D#Z
##Z#Z#ZZZ
#######Z
########

With this, you'll greatly reduce amount of enemies capable of attacking.
However, this tactic doesn't work against enemies with disintegration or
earthquake attacks, or enemies that can dig through walls.'

--- LoS Trick ---
Keine - 'Have you got used to picking targets for ranged attacks and spells?
There's a handy way of targeting a specific location.
If you can't target an enemy because there's something in the way, you can
press '*' to manually move target location; if you keep targeting slightly
behind the enemy, they might end up being in your aiming trajectory.
If you shoot at this point, you'll hit the enemy on that line.
This lets you attack before the enemy enters your line of sight.
However, this trick works only for shooting attacks, bolts and beams.
You can't use it with ball spells or curses.'

 @*****
#####p**o
#####

(By aiming around 'o', you might be able to hit 'p' you normally wouldn't
be able to target)

--- Poison Needle ---
Keine - 'There's a weapon called Poison Needle from a certain famous JRPG.
If you wield it and hit an enemy, you might be able to defeat them in a single
strike - even a huge dragon with 5000 HP.
You can go to Dragon's Lair and hunt for powerful enemies like wyrms.
If you hit several times and it doesn't work, retreat before your HP runs out.
If you use it well, you can get several ten thousands experience points and
dozens of good items.
Of course, it's very dangerous; you'll need a certain amount of HP, along with
means of double resistance and detection.

Some people hate this 'scumming' tactic, but it's not against the rules.
If you're stuck in midgame, try it out at your own risk.
I also should mention that poison needles won't work against unique monsters.
Also, in this mod, maximum damage you can deal with it is 9999.'

--- Stat Gain ---
Keine - 'While preparing your equipment is important, you'll have trouble
getting past midgame unless you raise your stats as well.
In order to raise them, you have to search for potions like 'Potion of 
Strength' and drink them.
They're generally found around dungeon level 30-45.
Enemies that drop only 'good items' won't drop consumables.
If you keep using poison needles in Dragon Lair, you might end developing
slowly in this regard.'

***** <Tactics3>
=== Lower Level Tactics ===
Keine - 'Once you reach dungeon levels 60-70,
you'll probably be strong enough to match the more powerful residents of
Gensoukyou.
It's time to level up to upper limit and look for endgame equipment as you
prepare for the final battle.
At this point, there's a multitude of possible combat tactics, so I'll
cover only a few absolutely vital topics.'

--- *Destruction* ---
Keine - 'Many enemies appear on lower levels.
Many strong enemies have powerful summoning spells.
You'll have hard time trying to fight them one by one. In this case,
what you need is *Destruction*.
How do you read it? Feel free to shout 'Destruction!'.

Once you use *Destruction*, the area in radius of 12-17 grids around you
will be destroyed. All monsters and items will diseappear, and terrain will
be turned to either open floor or walls. The monsters caught up in the blast
are probably thrown to the lower or upper dungeon level. Any unique monsters
caught in that area of effect still can appear later in the game.
You can use *Destruction* from scrolls, staves or some spells. Realms of
Chaos, Divination and Exorcism have spells with this effect.

Since scrolls are consumables, you'll be relying on staves, but Staves of
*Destruction* are difficult to use. Warriors, Samurai, Engineer and other
classes who aren't proficient with magic devices will have a hard time on
lower floors without raising that skill with equipment.'

--- Emergency Escapes ---
Keine - 'On lower levels, there are many enemies with powerful ranged
attacks, so simply teleporting away is dangerous - especially if you're low
on health. However, if, for example, you get surrounded by summoned monsters
after getting hit by a powerful spell, you have to teleport away.

At that point, you might abandon the fight and escape to another floor.
Of course, you'll miss out on experience and items, but your life is more
important. I recommend using Scrolls of Teleport Level to escape.
If you read one, you will move to another level, where you'll be able to act
once again.
They're sometimes being sold at the Pawn Shop; carry several of them with you
when exploring lower levels.

Scrolls of *Destruction* also can be used as an emergency escape.
What about Staves of *Destruction*? You might fail to properly use a staff or 
a rod. If you're proficient with magic, you'll have low failure rate even when
using complex magic devices, but you still might get a game over if you get
unlucky.

After getting out of a fight in this manner, heal up as fast as possible
even if you don't see other enemies nearby.
You don't know who's awake in the dungeon.
Needless to say, you can't read scrolls if you're blinded or confused, so
keep those resistances in mind as well.'

--- Lords of Amber and Blood Curse ---
Keine - 'There are people called 'Lords of Amber'.
They look like ordinary humans, but they're very long-lived, extremely
resilient, and can walk across parallel worlds at will.
There are twelve Lords of Amber in Hengband.
They're going to be a major obstacle at the end of your adventure.

Is there anyone who's thinking rude things like 'Who are those invincible
OCs'? Let me explain, just in case.
Lords of Amber are a royal family appearing in Roger Zelazny's work, the 
Chronicles of Amber series.
They were added in Zangband (which was derived from Angband), and they
occupy an important position in the original Hengband as well.

Now that we have that out of the way...
All of the Lords of Amber are pretty strong, but what's most terrifying about
them is their final attack called 'Blood Curse'.
Once you defeat one of them, they have 50% to cast a terrible curse at you.
If they do, a more powerful version of Ancient Foul Curse I've explained
earlier will go off. With bad luck, you can get surrounded by enemies and then
turned into a statue, leading to a game over.
To counteract this, raise your protection from magic to around Legendary[2];
this will prevent you from being turned into a statue.
High level Shrine-Maidens will naturally have enough magic protection,
and other classes might guarantee it by using equipment with anti-magic.
By the way, defeating Lords of Amber slightly raises your score.'


