=== Magic, Special Abilities, Racial Powers ===

Keine - 'Many classes can learn 'special abilities'.
You'll be able to learn more of them as you become more experienced.
Once you've leveled up high enough, use them with 'J' command.

Also, many races can learn 'racial powers'.
They're the physical characteristics you've been born with.
Once you've leveled up high enough, use them with 'U' command.
You also can learn racial powers through mutations or Transformation magic.

Several classes can learn 'spells'.
You learn them by studying spellbooks, and you can use spell you've learned
with 'm' command. Now, some people might think about Royal Flare or Master
Spark upon hearing 'spells', but those are implemented as special abilities
for unique classes.
A few classes like Mindcrafter can use their special abilities with 'm'.

For example, a White Wolf Tengu Shugenja can:
Meditate by using a special ability with 'J' command, recovering MP
Carefully listen with 'U' command, detecting monsters
Cast learned spells with 'm' command

You cannot use those abilities while confused, and you can't cast spells if
you're blind or in a dark area.

If you wish to learn about effects of those special abilities, racial powers
and spells, you can browse their descriptions with 'b' command.'

***** <MagicUse>
=== Learning and Casting Spells ===

Keine - 'Let's take a closer look at learning and casting spells.
I mentioned some of this content at the point of character creation, but let's
review it once again.

Naturally, you can't learn spells if your class can't use magic.
Even then, the spellcaster classes can only learn spells belonging to the
'realms' they're studying.
We'll cover the realms a bit later.

Once you have a spellbook of your magic realm, you can learn spells with 'G'.
Spells you can learn with proper level and aptitude are displayed in blue, and
you learn a spell by choosing it.
Now you've learned a single spell.

You can use spells you've learned with 'm' command.
You require a spellbook that lists that spell in order to use it. Normally
you'd carry in your inventory, but you can cast spells from spellbooks lying
beneath your feet as well.
After pressing 'm', choose a spellbook, then pick an available spell in order
to cast it.

However, spells vary in difficulty, and more complex ones are more likely to
fail. Failure rate depends on spell's base difficulty, your aptitude, spell
proficiency, character level and intelligence.
There are items that can slightly reduce failure rate if you wear/wield them.
If you're wearing gloves/gauntlets, your failure rate goes up, unless this
handweat has free action or increases your dexterity or magic device mastery.
The higher your dexterity is, the lesser this penalty will be.

Also, you cannot cast spells unless you have enough MP.
MP cost depends on spell's base cost, your aptitude and spell proficiency.
There are items that can slightly reduce MP cost if you wear/wield them.
If you're encumbered by heavy equipment, your spells will cost more MP.
The higher your strength is, the lesser this penalty will be.

I've said that before, but you can't read spellbooks if you're confused,
blind, or in a dark area.'

***** <MagicBlast>
=== Offensive Spells: Area of Effect ===

Keine - 'If you look at descriptions for offensive spells, you'll notice
terms like 'bolt', 'ball', 'beam'. I'll explain them here.

- Bolt
  A spell that fires a magic bolt/bullet. Comparatively frequently found among
  low level spells. Deals damage if it hits an enemy, but doesn't go past
  that enemy.
  Also, it can be reflected by enemies that reflect bolt spells.
  There are also spells that fire several bolts at locations close to the
  target.

- Ball
  Explosive spells. It sends out a sphere that explodes at the target, but it
  passes through any enemies on the way without dealing damage.
  It deals 100% damage at the center, 50% at adjacent grids, 33% at grids
  adjacent to those - it deals less damage the further a grid is located from
  the epicenter.

- Beam
  Laser spells. Pierces through enemies and can't be reflected.
  There are several spells that fire wide lasers.

- Rocket
  A combination of bolt and ball.
  Sends out a sphere that explodes upon hitting an enemy. Can't be reflected.

- Curses/etc
  You pick a target in your sight, and the spell applies its effect to that
  target only. Think of it as a radius 0 ball spell.

- Line of sight
  Hits everything in your sight. Be careful - it can destroy items lying on
  the floor as well.

- Directional
  After you cast it, you'll be prompted for a direction input.
  If there's a monster in that place, the spell applies its effect to that
  monster.

- Breath
  A combination of beam and ball.
  Deals damage to everyone on its firing trajectory, and deals reduced damage
  to anyone close by that trajectory.'

***** <Realm>
=== Magic Realms ===

Keine - 'Now, let's take a look at magic realms.
In Gensouband, there are 13 magic realms, each of them has 4 spellbooks,
and each of those spellbooks has 8 spells.
During character creation, sometimes you can pick 1 or 2 realms from those
13. Spells in the second realm you pick will be slightly harder to learn.

I've said that you can't learn spells unless you're studying their realm;
however, if your class can pick a second realm to study, you can always change
that choice.
However, once you change it, you forget all the spells you've learned in your
old second realm. There's an upper limit on how many spells you can learn, so
avoid changing realms without a good reason.
Reading a Scroll of Spell increases amount of spells you can learn by 1.

As an exception, a few classes like Patchouli or Librarian start out with all
spells learned already, but they can't change realms.

Those 13 realms are:

Elements, Divination, Enchantment, Summoning, Mysticism, Life, Exorcism, 
Nature, Transformation, Darkness, Necromancy, Chaos, Occult

Those realms belong to one of major realms - Arcane Arts, Hermit Arts, or
Sorcery Arts.

Elements, Divination, Enchantment, Summoning belong to Arcane Arts,
Mysticism, Life, Exorcism, Nature belong to Hermit Arts,
Transformation, Darkness, Necromancy, Chaos belong to Sorcery Arts.
Occult doesn't belong to any of those.

If your first and second realms belong to different major realms,
learning spells in your second realm will be far more difficult, so
keep that in mind.

Here are simple descriptions of those 13 magic realms.
If you're a magic specialist like Mage or High-Mage, it'll probably be
better to pick a realm with reliable offense for your first one.

- Arcane Arts of Elements
  This realm has plenty of elemental (acid, lightning, fire, cold) offensive
  spells. They're comparatively powerful and don't cost much MP. However,
  many enemies resist basic elements, so you have to carefully choose your
  spells by looking at enemy resistances. Has some defensive and support
  spells as well.

- Arcane Arts of Divination
  This realm is full of detection spells like monster detection, nearby area
  mapping, temporary telepathy, and so on.
  By the end, you'll be able to learn incredible spells interfering with
  causality, but up to that point, you'll be mostly using detection.

- Arcane Arts of Enchantment
  This realm is full of defensive and support spells. Works well with close
  combat proficient classes like Magic-Knight.
  Has a few offensive spells as well, but it's hard to rely on them.

- Arcane Arts of Summoning
  This realm has plenty of summoning and teleportation spells. Spellcaster
  classes aren't that bad at being summoners. However, if you fail to cast a
  summoning spell, the summoned monster will attack you.
  Also, keep in mind you won't receive experience or items from enemies
  defeated by your summoned monsters.

- Hermit Arts of Mysticism
  Has no offensive spells, but excels at support and is good at detection.
  Works well with close combat proficient classes like Shugenja.

- Hermit Arts of Life
  Has plenty of healing spells, and some defensive and support spells as well.
  You'll be very hard to take down if you study this realm.

- Hermit Arts of Exorcism
  Has many spells effective against enemies like youkai, undead or demons. Has
  some defensive spells as well. The divine possession spells in last volume
  are powerful, but you can keep one of them active at a time.

- Hermit Arts of Nature
  This realm has balanced assortment of offensive, defensive, detection,
  support and healing spells. However, the offensive spells are on the weak
  side, so it might be difficult fighting with this realm alone.

- Sorcery Arts of Transformation
  Has various offensive spells, but best known for transformation spells.
  While being transformed, your physical stats are greatly increased, but you
  can't read scrolls and some of your equipment is disabled; keep that in mind
  when using those spells. Spells in this realm generally cost a lot of MP.

- Sorcery Arts of Darkness
  Has many darkness attacks and ominous spells borrowing demonic power.
  Has plenty of offense-related support spells, making it suitable for close
  combat proficient classes. Especially effective against living beings and
  lawfully aligned creatures.
  Studying this realm will make you somewhat vulnerable to holy attacks.
  Also, failing to cast spells from this realm might cause bad things to
  happen.

- Sorcery Arts of Necromancy
  Has many nether/curse attacks and ominous spells borrowing power of the 
  dead. Compared to Darkness realm, this realm has more defensive and support
  spells. Strong against living beings, but you'll be at a major disadvantage
  against non-living enemies.
  Studying this realm will make you somewhat vulnerable to holy attacks.

- Sorcery Arts of Chaos
  Has plenty of fairly cost effective offensive spells. Uses many higher
  elements like mana that work well against all enemies, but as a demerit,
  those attacks destroy items on the floor. Has some inconsistent support
  spells as well, but they're very useful.
  Failing to cast spells from this realm might cause bad things to happen.

- OccultÅ
  This realm was added in version 1.1.08.
  Treats urban legends that recently have been manifesting in Gensoukyou as
  spells. Has many offensive/summoning spells, along with some support spells.
  Has many gimmicky spells that require a specific condition to go off or
  require some sort of additional cost.
  All races have normal aptitude for this realm.

That's about it.
There also are other books similar to spellbooks, but they're made
specifically for Samurai and Chemists.'


***** <RealmApt>
=== Realm Aptitude ===

Keine - 'Not everyone can use spells the same way.

For example, High-Mages learn spells quicker than ordinary Mages, and they
can cast them using less MP. On the other hand, Explorers and Ranger learn
spells slowly, and are unable to learn some of the more powerful ones.

Races have their own aptitudes as well.
For example, Youkai require a lot of time to learn Hermit Arts, but they're
good at Sorcery Arts. Hermits and Celestial have it the other way around.
Celestials in particular are completely unable to study Darkness/Necromancy
realms.

Those aptitudes are shown at character creation.
Of course, nobody's stopping you from deliberately picking a high difficulty
realm.'

***** <MagicSkill>
=== Spell Proficiency ===

Keine - 'Spells you just've learned have high failure rate and cost a lot of
MP. However, by using them several times, your spell proficiency will get
higher, steadily making the spell easier to use.
The [Be]/[Ex]/etc written after the spell name is proficiency level.
[Un] is Unskilled, [Be] is Beginner, [Sk] is Skilled, [Ex] is Expert,
and [Ma] is Master.
If there's a ! nearby, that means you can't go above current proficiency with
your class.

Also, by learning an already learned spell once again, you can raise your
proficiency by one stage. Of course, you have to keep in mind that there's a
limit on amount of spells you can learn, but endgame spells cost a lot of MP
and are hard to practice, so raising proficiency by studying them once again
is a viable option.'
Å@


