=== Gensouband Monsters ===

Keine - 'Gensouband has over a thousand different monsters, and most of them
will be trying to defeat you. Let's talk about those monsters.
Also, humans/deities are called here 'monsters' as well.'

***** <MonsterSymbols>
=== Monster Kinds and Symbols ===

Keine - 'I've already touched on what symbols can represent monsters, but
let's go over it once again.
Several symbols have changed their meaning from Hengband.
't' is tengu, 'S' is deity, 'K' is kappa, 'yY' are youkai', 'F' is fairy.
Spiders have joined 'c', beetles have joined 'I', yeti have joined 'H'.
Yeeks and townspeople don't appear in Gensouband.

a (Ant)                      Ants. Not that strong.
b (Bat)                      Bats. Not that strong.
c (Spider/centipede)         Insects. Not that strong, but some of them are
                             powerful.
d (Dragon)                   Somewhat small dragons. Comparatively resilient,
                             and use breath attacks.
e (Eye)                      Has many nasty sleep-inducing enemies. Very
                             powerful on lower levels.
f (Cat/feline werebeast)     Many of them are fast and comparatively strong.
g (Golem)                    Golems/dolls. Many of them are unaffected by
                             mental attacks or slaying weapons.      
h (Humanoid)                 Living beings resembling humans. Many of them use
                             spells or ranged attacks.
i (Icky thing)               Mysterious viscous lifeforms. Not that strong.
j (Jelly)                    Fluid lifeforms. Not that strong, but some of
                             them on lower levels are incredibly powerful.
k (Kobold/canine werebeast)  Many of them simply attack in melee. Not
                             particularly strong.
l (Aquatic lifeform)         Fish/octopi/etc. Some of them on lower levels are
                             unexpectedly strong, using nasty spells and
                             special attacks.
m (Mold)                     They don't move and attack by releasing spores.
                             Not that strong, but some of them are dangerous.
n (Naga/mermaid)             Not that strong. Some of them use magic.
o (Orc)                      Appear in groups and attack in melee. Not that
                             strong on their own, but can be dangerous in
                             early game.
p (Person)                   Human(-like) enemies. Some of them are proficient
                             at using magic, others are proficient at close
                             combat.
q (Quadruped)                Horses/bears/etc. Not that strong, but powerful
                             sacred beasts appear on lower levels.
r (Rodent)                   Not that strong.
s (Skeleton)                 Skeleton undead. Some of them on lower levels use
                             powerful spells.
t (Tengu)                    Tengu youkai. Many of them are powerful enemies
                             that are both fast and strong.
u (Lesser demon)             Lower class demons. Many of them use nasty magic
                             attacks.
v (Vortex)                   A magical vortex. Many of them move randomly and
                             use breath attacks.
w (Worm)                     Trash enemies in early game, but powerful giant
                             worms start appearing at midgame.
(x - not an enemy. Can be used to represent areas where you haven't detected 
traps with proper option)
y (Small youkai)             Small youkai. Not that strong.
z (Zombie)                   Walking corpses. Not that strong, but some can
                             use powerful spells.

A (Angel)                    Very strong enemies at late midgame. Many of them
                             use holy attacks.
B (Bird/winged monster)      Many of them move quickly. Winged monsters start
                             appearing in late midgame.
C (Dog/wolf)                 They perform well-coordinated attacks in packs.
                             There are legendary giant beasts on lower levels.
D (Ancient dragon)           Very powerful enemies. The power of their breath
                             attacks is tremendous.
E (Elemental)                They use nasty magic attacks. Monstrous being
                             appear on lower levels.
F (Fairy)                    They're not particularly strong, but they appear
                             in groups and fire danmaku; don't get careless.
G (Ghost)                    Many of them are invisible and can pass through
                             walls. Their magical attacks are dangerous.
H (Hybrid)                   Living beings made up of various beasts. Many of
                             them have both resilient and strong.
I (Insect)                   Various insects. Not that strong, but some of
                             them are huge monsters.
J (Snake)                    Snakes. Not that strong, but powerful beings
                             appear on lower levels.
K (Kappa)                    Kappas. Many of them use water attacks.
L (Lich)                     Powerful undead spellcaster. Many of them use
                             multitude of nasty attacks.
M (Multi-headed reptile)     Hydras. The more heads it has, the stronger it
                             is. Includes some very powerful monstrosities.
N (Shadower)                 Unidentified suspicious shadow. You can tell its
                             true form with probing magic.
O (Ogre/oni)                 Many of them are good at physical combat. Oni are
                             very powerful enemies.
P (Giant)                    Many of them are powerful. Some are unbelievably
                             physically strong, others use powerful spells.
Q (Quylthulg)                Mysterious flesh mound. Uses teleportation and
                             summoning spells.
R (Reptile/amphibian)        Lizards/frogs in early game are trash enemies,
                             but monsters with dangerous breath attacks start
                             appearing at midgame.
S (Deity)                    Divine spirits and stray gods aren't strong, but
                             there also are powerful scourge gods.
T (Troll)                    Large humanoid monsters who appear in groups.
U (Greater demon)            Many of them use fire/nether attacks. On lower
                             levels, their physical attacks get devastating
                             as well.
V (Vampire)                  They use nasty spells and drain life force. On
                             lower levels, their physical attacks are very
                             strong as well.
W (Wight)                    More ominous than a zombie - or something to that
                             effect. Many of them use powerful spells.
X (Xorn)                     Mysterious beings that can move through walls.
Y (Large/humanoid youkai)    Powerful youkai. Can use all kinds of attacks.
Z (Zephyr hound)             Hound-shaped elementals. They appear in groups
                             and use breath attacks.

# (Tree/tentacle/mist/etc)   Hard to describe in a short sentence.
% (Wall monster)             Moving walls. Will multiply if you leave them
                             alone.
* (Sphere)                   Explosive fireballs or floating magic circles.

Aside from that, there are mimic monsters that look like items or normal
terrain, and symbols that generally aren't that strong might have some
powerful unique monsters on lower levels.
Monsters can share a symbol/color combination.

You can tell what monster it is with the 'l'ook command.
You should make a habit of looking at anything that catches your eye.
You also can set up a list of visible monsters in a subwindow.
For more details, check the Commands and Options sections.'

***** <MonsterLevel>
=== Monster Level ===

Keine - 'Monster level is shown as 'usually found on dungeon level ##'.
A level 60 monster doesn't usually appear at level 59 or above.
However, in special dungeon feature like vault or monster hordes, high
level enemies (compared to current dungeon level) are more likely to appear.
Even during normal monster generation, there is some chance for an out of
depth monster to spawn.
Muenzuka in particular has a lot of powerful enemies. Don't lower your guard.'

***** <MonsterAbl>
=== Monster Abilities ===
Keine - 'Monsters can have various abilities or special characteristics.
Let's take a look at them.

- Casts spells intelligently
  This monster is smart; if a spell they use isn't effective against you,
  they'll try out a different one.
  Has no effect on Normal difficulty and lower.

- Reflects bolt spells
  A powerful enemies that reflect bolt abilities/spells.
  Shooting with 'f' or throwing with 'v' won't get reflected.
  Ammo from Engineer's machines will get reflected - be careful.

- Invisible
  You can't see this monster; even if you manage to attack them, your chance
  to hit will be far lower. You will be able to see them if you have the
  proper ability.

- Mindless
  Golems or lower lifeforms, or weird entitites from other worlds.
  You won't be able to sense those monsters if you have telepathy, and they're
  not affected by mental attacks.

- Powerful
  The spells this monster uses are more powerful than usual.
  They also become more resistant to some spells.

- Madness inducing
  Unimaginably terrifying monsters from other worlds.
  You might end up confused or paralyzed just be looking at them, and in worse
  cases, you might start hallucinating and received brain trauma.
  Confusion resistance and free action prevents those effects, and chaos
  resistance prevents hallucinations.
  Insanity resistance makes you unaffected by this ability.

- Multiplying
  A monster that occasionally splits in two. The new monster start out at
  full HP. Those new monsters can multiply further as well, so it might get
  out of hand.

- Gigantic
  Huge monsters over 10 meters in size.
  They're less likely to get affected by status abnormalities like stunning,
  and they recover quickly.
  Some abilities/spells are less effective against them.

- Follow teleporting enemies
  If this monster is close to you and you teleport away, this monster will
  also teleport to a location close to you.

- Pick up/destroy items
  Nasty enemies that pick up or destroy items lying on the floor.
  If you defeat them after they've picked up an item, they will drop
  that item.
  Monsters can't pick up or destroy artifacts.

- Aquatic
  This monster spawns in water terrain and cannot leave it.

- Flying
  This monster can cross lava and deep pits.

- Pass through/destroy walls
  This monster heads towards you passing through or breaking down walls.

- Transform into another monster
  Ability specific to youkai foxes and tanuki.
  Youkai tanuki only look like other monsters, but some of them are pretty
  strong on their own - which can be a nasty surprise if you mistake one for
  a trash enemy.
  Youkai foxes completely transform into another monster, including their
  abilities, and you can't tell that until you defeat them.
  They also might suddenly transform into another monster as you fight them.

There are some other abilities, but those are most complex ones.'

***** <MonsterMelee>
=== Monster Melee Attacks ===

Keine - 'Many monsters will attack you if you stand next to them.
Accuracy depends on the monster's level and your AC.
Damage inflicted depends on attack's dice values and extra effects.

For example, in 'slash to burn for 8d8 damage', the 'burn' part is the
attack's effect. Let's look at some of them.

- Attack
  Normal attack. If your AC is high enough, you take reduced damage.

- Shatter
  Might cause an earthquake; if rubble falls on your head, you take extra
  damage. Like with normal attacks, damage can be reduced with high AC.

- Powerfully attack
  Sometimes might cause a 'critical hit', dealing extra damage.
  Like with normal attacks, damage can be reduced with high AC.

- Wound
  Inflicts wounds. Like with normal attacks, damage can be reduced with 
  high AC.

Damage from following attacks won't get reduced depending on your AC.

- Shoot acid/burn/freeze/etc
  Attacks with a basic element; damage can be reduced with proper resistance.
  If you don't have double resistance or immunity, it might destroy your
  possessions.

- Confuse
  Confuses you unless you resist confusion. Extremely dangerous.
  If you resist confusion, you'll be unaffected, but you still take full
  damage. There are giant monsters past midgame with confusing melee attacks
  that deal a lot of damage.

- Paralyze
  Paralyzes you unless you have free action.
  If you get paralyzed, you still will get constantly attacked, practically
  guaranteeing a game over. Enemies with this attack start appearing around
  dungeon level 40. I've told this many times already, but get free action as
  soon as you can.

- Reduce stats (strength/intelligence/wisdom/etc)
  Temporarily slightly reduces one of your primary stats. Might get nasty
  in a drawn out fight. If you have that stat sustained, it won't be reduced,
  but you still take full damage.

- Disenchant
  Reduces quality of your equipment unless you resist disenchantment.
  It doesn't reduces only AC/accuracy/damage bonuses, but it can reduce stat
  bonuses as well. Even artifacts can get disenchanted!
  If you don't have the resistance, don't approach those enemies at all.

- Drain mana
  This attack deals damage to MP instead of HP.

- Drain charges
  Not only deals damage, but also reduces amount of charges in wands/staves
  you're carrying to 0, and recovers the monster's HP.
  Extremely nasty attack that is frequently used by high-ranking undead and
  spellcasters.

- Steal gold
  Steals around 1/10 of your money and teleports away somewhere.
  Unfortunately, you won't get your stolen money back even if you defeat that
  enemy. It's also annoying how it's hard to keep hitting them as they keep
  running away.

There are other various attacks, but those are the main ones.
Getting hit by a normal attack still might stun or confuse you if you get
unlucky.'

***** <MonsterPower>
=== Monster Spells/etc ===

Keine - 'Monsters can use various spells and special abilities. Let's look
at some of them. Many of those spells become more powerful the higher level
the enemy is.

- Breath attacks
  Powerful attack that involves breathing some element like fire/acid.
  Most of the dragons have at least one of those.
  Breath power depends on monster's current HP, but there's also an upper
  limit. Enemies around dungeon level 40 have far more health, making breath
  attacks very formidable.

- Basic elements (acid, lightning, fire, cold) bolts/balls/storms
  Standard elemental spells like fireballs.
  They don't deal that much damage, but they hurt a lot in early game if you
  lack the proper resistance.
  The higher level storm spells are very painful unless you have double
  resistance. Having your items destroyed is unpleasant as well.

- Higher element bolts/balls/storm
  High level spells like 'darkness storm', 'nether ball', 'mana bolt',
  'disintegration ball'. Comparatively powerful - watch out for enemies
  using these.

- Confusion/blindness/terror/paralysis
  Spells that attempt to inflict a status abnormality on you.
  Annoying if you don't have proper resistance, paralysis in particular
  is very dangerous. Enemies using paralyzing magic start appearing around
  dungeon level 25.

- Mental attacks (mind blast/brain smash/etc)
  Spells directly attacking your mind.
  Deals no damage if you resist, but they have a good chance at successfully
  hitting you if your protection from magic is low.
  Aside from taking damage, you might get confused/slowed/etc.
  There's also an incredibly powerful ability that's guaranteed to hit unless
  you have insanity resistance.

- Curse
  Magic attacks that curse you.
  Deals no damage if you resist, but they have a good chance at successfully
  hitting you if your protection from magic is low.
  Aside from taking damage, you might have your equipment get cursed.
  There are powerful curses that can halve your HP.

- Exorcism
  Magic attacks that purify you.
  Deals no damage if you resist, but they have a good chance at successfully
  hitting you if your protection from magic is low.
  If you're not vulnerable to holy attacks, it does nothing, but it will hurt
  you if you're a youkai or something similar.
  Aside from taking damage, you might get stunned.

- Teleport spells
  Teleportation magic. Has various different kinds.
  Some of them teleport you instead of the monster, and there are monsters
  capable of teleporting next to you from out of your line of sight.

- Summoning
  Summons various monsters.
  Some of them summon only one monster, other can instantly surround you with
  powerful dragons. Many powerful enemies starting from late midgame can
  summon, making it difficult to fight them properly.
  You'll have to do something to counter it.

- Haste, healing, invulnerability
  Spells monsters cast on themselves.
  You want to deal with enemies like this as soon as possible.

- Scream, alarm
  Troublesome abilities that wake up nearby monsters with a loud shout or an
  alarm. Alarm also temporarily hastes monsters in sight.
  Be careful when fighting monsters capable of sounding an alarm.

- Dispel Magic
  Removes various temporary effects on you from potions or spells.
  Powerful ones like invulnerability or giantform aren't an exception.
  Frequently used by high-ranking spellcasters, demons and deities.

- Rocket
  Powerful weapon.
  Frequently used by the Cyberdemons on lower levels, dealing 800 damage.
  That's the reason shards resistance is required for exploring lower levels.
  Even with it, you take 400 damage.

- Psycho-Spear
  Powerful beam attack that ignores resistances and protective spells.

- Final Spark
  No need to mention who's using it. Intensive disintegration beam. If fired
  at a wall, the wall will be broken down.

- Special actions
  Some monsters have their own special abilities; they are both unique and
  powerful.

Well, that's mostly it.'


***** <MonsterMemory>
=== Monster Memory and Probing ===

Keine - 'There's over a thousand different monsters with their own special
abilities and characteristics. It's not something a normal person can be 
expected to remember.

No need to worry! Actually, you have amazing memory. As you fight monsters,
you observe the spells they're using, special characteristics of their melee
attacks, and what elements can affect them. You faultlessly memorize this 
information and never forget it.

And even if you get a game over halfway through, those memories won't go away.
If you start another game from the same savefile, you will inherit the
memories of previous adventures. If you keep trying over and over again, you
will be able to memorize most of information about monsters. This will help a
lot in your adventure.

Even without observing various monster actions, if you perform 'probing', you
will learn all information about the monsters, like their special abilities
and resistances. You can use Staves of Probing sold in stores for this.
There are some other spells with probing effects, and Maids, Rangers and White
Wolf Tengu learn similar special abilities.

By 'l'ooking at a monster and pressing 'r' key, you can recall whatever
information you've learned about it. You also can display information about
currently targeted monster in a subwindow. This will be explained in more
details in Options section.'

***** <Uniques>
=== Unique Monsters ===

Keine - 'There are powerful enemies called 'unique monsters'.
Once you defeat one of them, you will never encounter that monster during this
adventure again. Unique monsters are unlikely to be affected by status
abnormality inducing spells, can resist many various actions, and cannot be
defeated except by your direct attacks.
Many of them are clearly very strong for their level. Fight them with all
you've got, and if it looks like you can't win, run away.

All of the various danmaku girls of Gensoukyou are unique monsters, and
they're likely to get in your way.'

--- Special Unique Monsters ---
Keine - 'I just said that you won't encounter a unique monster you've defeated
once again, but there are two exceptions. It's the shrine maiden and magician
who've resolved numerous incidents.
They're still going to keep appearing no matter how many times you defeat
them, and their strength matches the current dungeon level.
They're not that strong in early game, but they'll grow up to be unbelieveably
powerful enemies on lower levels.'

--- Random Unique Monsters ---
Keine - 'There are other special unique monsters.
If you defeat them or run away from them, you truly won't be able to meet them
again. You won't know their abilities until you run into them and use probing.
You can vaguely tell their strength and attack specialty by their name, but
don't get overconfident.'

***** <Pets>
=== About Followers ===

Keine - 'Monster can fight on your side as your followers.
If you make a powerful monster your follower, fighting is going to become far
easier. They're very dedicated to following you, and won't fight back even if
you attack them.

Followers are very useful, but there are some catches.

- Enemies defeated by your followers don't drop items and give you no
  experience. Your follower takes it all (there are some exceptions).
- Having followers reduces your MP regeneration.
  If you have too many, your MP will start to decrease; once it drops to 0,
  you have to dismiss some of them.
  Compared to Hengband, penalty for having high level followers is
  higher in Gensouband. However, having high charisma allows you to maintain
  more followers.
  Followers you dismiss will disappear from the level. Don't be concerned 
  about them attacking you.
- If you move to another map/level, any followers that aren't close to you
  will wander away.
- You don't get experience or items from attacking your followers, but you
  gain a small amount of proficiency. You can train your skills by beating
  your followers, but don't overdo it.

Now, let's see how you can make monsters follow you.
The most basic way is to summon or charm a monster. Summoning, Necromancy,
Nature, and some other realms include summoning/charming spells.
Severals classes/unique classes also might learn similar special abilities.
There are scrolls that summon a random monster as your follower.

Next way is to use a 'figurine'.
You sometimes can find strange items called 'Figurine of ###'. If you throw
it with 'v' commnad, it will transform into the monster and follow you.
However, if you throw a cursed figurine, the monster will be hostile and
attack you.

Finally, you can use 'Demon books'.
Demon books are books written about youkai, and you can seal monsters inside
them. If you weaken an enemy close to the point of being defeated, hold the
book in your hand and activate it, you can capture that enemy inside your
demon book, turning it into your follower.
It's not limited to youkai - you can capture humans as well. Don't think
about it too much.
If a monster already is your follower, you can absorb it into a book without
weakening it first. You can carry your favorite followers with you in those
books.

Demon books are sold in Human Village's Bookstore.
By the way, this item was called 'Capture Ball' in Hengband.'

***** <Riding>
=== Riding your Followers ===

Keine - 'You can ride some of your followers like horses or dragons.
When riding, you and your follower occupy the same space, with your follower
moving along with you. The follower can performs attacks as usual while
you're riding. Here are some other riding specifics:

- Movement speed
  Your movement speed becomes around the same as your mount.
  This means you don't have to look for speed-increasing equipment. That's
  a big merit. You move somewhat slower if your Riding proficiency is low,
  and having high proficiency lets you move at a faster speed than the
  monster's original.

- Attack splitting
  Either you or your mount can get hit by enemy attacks.
  If you're riding, it will look like you're receiving far less enemy
  attacks. However, breath attacks, for example, will hit you both.

- Aura damage
  If your monster has a fire (or any other) aura, you receive damage while
  riding it. Unless you have immunity to that element, riding will be
  difficult.

- Falling from mount
  You can get knocked down from your mount by enemy attacks.
  I've said before you don't have to look for speed-increasing equipment if
  you're riding, but getting knocked down on lower levels might get you in
  big trouble.
  How likely are you to fall down depends on damage you've received, your
  Riding skill and the level of your mount - it is harder to stay mounted on
  higher level monsters.
  If you get told something like 'perfectly controlling this monster', you're
  probably not going to get knocked down by enemy attacks. Of course, if the
  monster you're riding gets defeated, you get dismounted.

- Weapon penalties/bonuses
  It is somewhat harder to land hits on enemies while riding.
  However, weapons that are 'suitable for riding' have a small penalty.
  Most of spears/polearms are suitable for riding.
  Also, lances and heavy lances are weapons made for mounted combat, and they
  will receive a dice boost if you use them while riding.

- Reins
  You have to keep one of your hands free to control your mount.
  You can let go of reins through the orders command we'll cover later,
  but if you let go while your proficiency is low, your mount won't understand
  where it's supposed to go. Also, you're more likely to get knocked down if
  you're not holding the reins.

While riding is extremely convenient, unfortunately, only few classes have
good aptitude for this skill. If your aptitude is at B, it's good enough to
use even at lower levels. 
Also, raising your Riding proficiency takes a lot of time. You'll have to 
start from weaker monster and systematically train it.'

***** <Order>
=== Follower Orders ===

Keine - 'You can give various orders to your followers with 'p' command.
Let's take a look at them:

- Dismiss followers
  Dismissed followers disappear from current level. They won't attack you.

- Specify target
  Use to make them go for a specific enemy.

- Stay close ~ stay away
  Orders how far away your followers should stay away from you.

- Open doors/pick up items/cast spells/etc
  Allows or forbids specific actions.

- Involve player in area spells
  Normally, followers won't use breath attack or spells that would hit you.
  However, for example, if you're immune to fire, and your follower is a
  Behemoth that only has fire attacks, you can give this order, letting it
  attack at will.
  Don't forget to switch it to 'off' if you change your equipment.

- Ride/get off
  Use when you want to ride your follower.

- Give name
  Use if you want to name your follower.
  It's harder to accidentally dismiss or leave behind your named followers.

- Use both hands for a weapon/use one hand to control mount
  If you're riding a follower, you usually want to control the monster with a
  free hand. However, you can switch to holding your weapon with both hands.
  In this case, you're more likely to get knocked down from your mount, and
  you won't be able to control your monster if your Riding proficiency is low.
  In this mod, your mount won't move on its own even if you let go of reins
  at Riding proficiency of 25. If your Riding proficiency is at 45, you are
  able to normally control your mount even if you're not holding its reins.'

***** <Friendly>
=== Friendly Monsters ===

Keine - 'Some of the monsters are friendly.
Friendly monsters won't attack you and might even attack your enemies along
with you. In contrast to followers, they don't require MP to maintain, but
they won't follow orders either. Be careful not to accidentally get hit by
their attacks. By the way, they will get angry and turn hostile along with
other nearby friendly monsters if you attack them.'









