
***** <Mutation>
=== Mutations ===

Keine - 'You might gain mutations during your exploration.
This is a phenomenon that alters your body and/or mind.
Some of them are harmless, like growing cat ears; some of them are useful
mutations that raise your parameters; some of them can lead to a game over
unless you cure them quickly enough.

Mutations are mainly caused by following reasons:
- Getting hit by chaos element attack without chaos resistance can give a
  random mutation
- Drinking a Potion of Mutation has a high chance of giving you several
  mutations
- Some spells like Alter Self can give you mutations
- Getting hit by an insanity-inducing attack has a low chance of giving
  you a harmful mutation

Here's the main ways of curing mutations:
- Curing mutations at Eientei removes a random mutation ($3000)
- Drinking a Potion of Mutation has a low chance of curing all of your
  mutations
- Some potions and spells like 'New Life' or racial transformation cure
  all of your mutations

You should remember that the more mutations you have, the slower your HP/MP
regeneration will be. There are some techniques involving deliberately
getting hit by chaos element attacks in order to obtain beneficial mutations;
but if you overdo it, you'll have harder time exploring.

Several races essentially start out with mutations - Oni have horns, Merfolk
have tails.
Those innate racial characteristics cannot be removed and do not affect
regeneration rate.'

--- Changing your Race ---
Keine - 'There are extremely powerful spells and curses that can change your
race. You're not likely to run into them too often, but here's a list of
most common reasons:

- If you attract attention of a Chaos Patron, they might decide to change
  your race
- Spells like Alter Self have low chance of changing your race
- The spells 'Rebirth' (Transformation realm) and 'Demon God of Netherworld'
  (Necromancy realm) change your race
- Equipping some special artifacts changes your race (It will give you a
  warning)

After transformation, your current level will be recalculated according to
your new race's experience modifier. Your score will be calculated using the
lowest score modifier among the races you've been. If you win the game with
a strong race and then transform into a weaker one, your score won't go up.

Several races like Youkai-Dolls or Stray-Gods can't be affected by this.
Also, if you're playing as an unique class, you can't change your races by
means other than spells and special artifacts.'

***** <Extra_mode>
=== Extra Mode ===

Keine - '"Extra" difficulty level was added in v 1.0.99.
It makes your adventure completely different compared to other difficulty
levels. Here's the detailed list of differences:

- You start from level 1 of Angband and can only go down
  You start at a random position on level 1 of Angband insted of the Human
  Village. Staircases lead only downward, and using Teleport Level always
  teleports you to the lower level.
  You cannot use spells/devices of Recall to leave the dungeon, and spells
  that recreate current level like Alter Reality or Shadowshift won't work
  either.
  Shafts that make you go down 2 levels at once don't appear.
  You have to clear 100 levels without going back.

- You level up fast
  In Extra mode, amount of experience required to gain next level is halved.
  Unless you have a severe experience penalty, you probably won't be concerned
  about being underleveled.
  Youkai-Dolls still require the same level of equipment power to level up,
  but you'll probably still level up faster since good equipment is easier to
  find.

- Good items generated more often, some consumables are generated in stacks
  In Extra mode, out-of-depth items get generated more often.
  You'll get more ego-items and artifacts, and items like potions/scrolls
  or wands can be generated several at a time.
  Unique monsters that can drop their special artifact are twice as likely
  to drop it.

- Item Cards
  There are mysterious cards with objects like Ying-Yang Ball or Hakkero
  drawn on them. Nothing happens if you carry them with you in your inventory,
  but by using 'U' command, you can set up to 8 different kinds of them in
  special slots and activate them later on.
  Activating them uses various special abilities like Fantasy Seal or Master
  Spark. It doesn't consume MP and never fails, but they're consumables -
  each activation uses up one card.
  Aside from offensive cards, there are defense and support-oriented as well.
  By reading the cards with 'r' command you can learn what effect they have.

  You have medium chance of getting those cards by defeating unique monsters.
  If you defeat a well-known resident of Gensoukyou, you have a high chance
  to obtain something connected to her.
  There also are cards lying around on the floor.
  Having high Searching skill makes them easier to find.

  You'll be lacking in various areas in Extra mode.
  Use the item cards to counteract that.

- Extra Quests
  In Extra mode, Angband's random quests aren't generated.
  Instead, there are 9 special quests on level 10, 20, 30, ..., 90.
  When you enter one of them, the map layout will be exactly the same as that
  of some quest dungeon; complete the quest by defeating all enemies, which
  will also drop several rewards close to the staircase.

  If you go down the stairs before completing the quest, it counts as
  abndoning the quest. If you use Teleport Level, you abandon the quest and
  move down to the next level.
  Just like in normal quest dungeons, you can't use *Destruction* or Massacre.
  You'll want to deal with summoning enemies as quick as you can.

- Special Buildings
  There's a small building somewhere on levels without a quest.
  This might be a shop like Weapon Store, or a special building that can
  remove curses, identify items, recharge devices, etc.
  Some of them are vital for completing your adventure, so find as many as you
  can. Sometimes you may get attacked by enemies as you explore a building, so
  don't search suspicious places if you're low on health.

- Level layout might be slightly different
  Sometimes, levels will resemble levels in Forest of Magic or Muenzuka,
  or have some other specific layout.
  Especially small levels don't get generated.
  Pits/nests are rarely generated, and dungeon towns can be found more often.

- Score is 4x compared to Normal, and 2x compared to Hard
  Since there aren't as many quests, bonus for competing quests and reaching
  new dungeon levels is higher compared to other difficulties.
  Also, some classes that aren't suited for Extra mode, or, the other way
  around, classes that aren't restricted too much by Extra mode, have their
  score modifier altered.
  Several birth options apply different score modifier compared to other
  difficulties.

- Other
  Stores in dungeon don't have much in stock, and will never restock no matter
  how long you wait.

  Several unique monsters that appear only in specific quests on other
  difficulties can be normally encountered in the dungeon.
  Be especially careful around the youkai tanuki boss.

  New non-unique monsters that get summoned or generated due to passage of
  time don't give too much items and experience.
  It's going to be slightly more difficult to clean up explored levels if
  summoners call for support.

That's the main differences.
Winning in Extra mode requires not only character skills and your own
experience, but a certain amount of luck as well.
I wish you good luck.'

--- How to use your Exploration Base in Extra mode ---

Keine - 'In Extra mode, you can't just return to town and visit you
exploration base. That's one of its severe restrictions. However, you might
find some means of temporarily accessing it in the dungeon.
The success of your quest greatly depends on whether you'll be able to find
and properly utilize them.
Here's a list of those methods:

- Using Item Cards
  You can access your exploration base with item 'Twisted Parasol' and
  'Magic Vial'.

  Parasol is a powerful card that creates an entrance to exploration base
  at your current location, but you can't use it on quest levels.
  You also can't use it on the lowest level before you've defeated the boss,
  so make preparations for the final battle before you enter the lowest level.
  You can't use it on the Extra Quest levels even after you've completed the
  quest.

  Vial can be used at any time, but the effect ends once you leave the base.
  Unlike Parasol, you can't use it to store various items scattered around on
  the floor. Also, while you're accessing the exploration base, you can't
  interact with your item card slots.
  Carefully think about what you want to store and what you want to take out
  before using the Vial.

  You can get item cards by defeating unique monsters or raising your
  Searching skill and looking for them in the dungeon.
  Those two cards are rare and hard to obtain, but you have a comparatively
  high chance of getting them by defeating Yukari Yakumo or a post-midgame 
  Marisa Kirisame. If they get generated in early game, the level feeling
  will significantly change, so you shouldn't miss them.

- Send items to Exploration Base with spells/devices.
  Some artifacts and spells can send items to your exploration base.
  Summoning, Nature and Chaos realms have those spells.
  However, it's a one-way transport to the base, you can't use it to take
  items out of there. There might be a weight limit on transported items,
  or a low chance of making the item disappear.

- Use special facilities
  In Extra mode, small buildings appear or non-quest levels, and some of
  them offer services to access your exploration base.
  'Divine Spirit Mausoleum Branch Office' can send items to your house.
  At an 'Open area' with the youkai Rin Kaenbyou, you can have her either
  carry items to your house or deliver one item from your house to you.
  At a 'Strange place' with a crack in the barrier, you can access your
  exploration base one item. However, if you fail, you will get sucked in,
  obtaining a mutation. Having high manual dexterity makes it easier to use.

  Also, you can exchange cards at Grassroots Youkai Network camps; it's one
  way to obtain to aforementioned item cards.
  It's a very valuable card, but someone might offer it in exchange.
  However, you'll also have to present very valuable cards as well.'

***** <Gun>
=== Gun Class Weapons ===

Keine - 'Gun class weapons underwent big changes in version 1.1.04.
Let's look over the new gun mechanics.
Commands are for standard keyboard layout.

- How to Use
  Equip it in your right or left hand, and fire with 'f' command (not 'A').
  After you enter the command, you will go to target selection; once you pick
  the target, a success check will be made.
  If you succeed, you will shoot at the target.
  No matter if you succeed or fail, you will use spend energy, and once you
  use up all of your bullets, you can't fire until you replenish at least
  one shot.

- Bullet Count
  Each gun has its own bullet count.
  The Evolving Gun "Crimson" (0d0) (+20, +20) (+4 speed) (6/6)
  The (6/6) at the end is bullet count. Each time you shoot, it will go down:
  (5/6), (4/6), ...

- Dual-wielding Guns
  You can hold different guns in both of your hands.
  In this case, after picking the target, separate success checks are made for
  both of them. You still consume the same amount of energy, but your shooting
  success rate is significantly decreased.
  Wearing gloves with dual wielding bonus reduces that penalty.
  Also, if you're holding a too heavy gun, you won't be able to fire either
  of them.

- Shooting Success Rate
  Shooting success rate depends on power of the gun you're using, your
  Shooting or Magic Device skill (whichever one is higher), dexterity,
  accuracy modifiers from your equipment and accuracy modifier on the gun.
  Shooting a gun while holding it in both hands increases success rate.
  Being terrified, confused or dual-wielding guns significantly reduces
  success rate. Classes with low aptitude for guns/shooting won't be able to
  properly shoot even if they find a powerful gun.

- Reducing Reloading Time
  Once you've used up all of your bullets, the gun starts reloading; the
  time depends on the kind of the gun;
  However, you can reduce it under some special conditions:
  * Your gun proficiency is high enough (4th stage)
  * The gun has the ability to shoot faster than usual
  * You're wearing a Ring of Extra Shots on the hand you're holding the
    gun with
  * Your personality is Trigger-Happy
  With those conditions being met, you can reload your guns up to 4-5 times
  as fast as usual.

- Gun Power
  Gun power completely depends on gun characteristics.
  Several special fixed artifacts aside, it's calculated as a simple dice roll
  plus damage bonus.
  Some guns use elements like fire or holy; in this case, damage can increase
  if it hits an enemy's weakness.

- Checking Shooting Attack Details
  You can confirm shooting success rate and reloading time for the gun you're
  holding at status screen through 'C' command. Once a gun is *identified*,
  you can check its element and other specifics with 'I' command.

- Martial Arts with Guns
  If you're holding a gun without any other melee weapon, you can use the gun
  to attack in melee. It is treated as a martial art attack, and depends on
  your Martial Art proficiency, strength, and dexterity.
  You sometimes will be able to fire at point blank range even if your gun is
  reloading, but don't think too much about it.
  Infantry guns have a bayonet attached to them, making their attack power
  higher.

- Reflection
  When you inspect your gun with 'I' command, if its shooting attack effect
  is described as 'bolt', some enemies might reflect it.
  If it is described as a plain 'shooting attack', it won't be reflected.

- Ego-items and Random Artifacts
  Ego-item and randart guns can be generated.
  Their shooting element and type might be changed.
  Guns that receive significant dice boost often shoot using some element,
  so pay attention to enemy resistance when using them.

- 'No guns are generated' option
  If you set 'No guns are generated option' to 'on', gun type weapons won't
  be generated. You always can switch it between 'on' and 'off', and there's
  no penalty or bonus of any kind.
  If you think gunpowder smell doesn't suit Gensoukyou, feel free to switch it
  to 'on'.

***** <Mana_shield>
=== About Barrier Guard ===

Keine - 'Starting from version 1.1.27, spellcaster classes can use 'Barrier
Guard' with Ctrl-'g' command.
While in this state, half of the damage you receive is taken from your MP
instead of HP. It makes late-midgame dungeon exploration easier for mages
with low HP.

However, if you receive too much damage at once or your MP reaches 0, you will
suffer a 'Guard Break', breaking the barrier and stunning you.
Also, the barrier will vanish if you wear anti-magic equipment or become 
paralyzed, confused, knocked out or heavily stunned.'

***** <AbilityCard>
=== Ability Cards ===

Keine - 'Ability Cards are magic items added in version 1.1.86.
There are two kinds of them: Some can be activated, others have passive
effects that apply when you're carrying them.
Keep in mind they're completely unrelated to the Item Cards that appear in
Extra difficulty level.'

--- Obtaining Ability Cards ---
Keine - 'Aside from some classes, there's very few opportunities to obtain
ability cards. In version 1.1.86, you can get two from quests at the location
'False Heaven Shelf'.
However, if you visit Lunar Marketplace at Moriya Shrine at night, you can
trade those ability cards for other ones of around the same rank.

Each card has its own rank, ranging from 1 to 4; cards with rank 1 are easy
to obtain, cards with rank 4 are rare.
Obtaining even one rank 4 card can significantly affect your adventure, but
it requires getting lucky enough for normal classes.

Some classes like 'Card-Trader' can obtain a lot of cards at facilities in
Moriya Shrine and False Heaven Shelf. Also, you can carry up to 9 ability
cards of the same kind in a single inventory slot.'

--- Activated Ability Cards ---
Keine - 'You can activate ability cards through 'u' command (in original
keyboard layout). You can fail to activate it, making you waste an action.
Success rate depends on Magic Device skill; it never will be 100%, no matter
how high your skill is. An activated card starts recharging and will be
available for use once again after several turns.
In other words, the work more or less like rods.

However, you cannot speed up recharging with something like Scroll of
Recharging; you have to wait for it to charge on its own.
Some passive ability cards speed up recharging for other cards.'

--- Passive Ability Cards ---
Keine - 'Passive ability cards apply their effect if you're carrying them in
your inventory. If you're a class with a separate inventory like Secondhand
Dealer, those cards still work even if they're located there.
Cards you leave at home or lying on the floor don't apply their effects.

If you're carrying 2 or more passive cards of the same kind, their effect
power will increase depending on their amount. As I said before, normal
classes can't get a lot of ability cards, but if a Card-Trader collects
enough powerful cards, their effect will be tremendous.'

--- Inspecting Ability Cards ---
Keine - 'You can learn about an *identified* ability card's effect with
'I' command. If you inspect a stack of passive cards, you will learn the total
effect of that stack.
Using 'r' command also lets you know that information about cards, but unlike
'I' command, it consumes energy, so be careful if there are enemies nearby.'

