Original is from Touhou Hengband wiki:
https://w.atwiki.jp/hengtouhou/pages/407.html

Guide - Getting Started (Game start - exploration base - Dreams Mausoleum exploration)

1. Buy equipment and supplies using your starting money
2-A. Clear the Thieves Hideout quest and get an exploration base
2-B. Raise your level and grind money at Dreams Mausoleum

Very early game is also described in details in the help file 'Beginner's Guide'.

* Shopping list for very start of the game

- General Store ('1')

Brass Lantern - Illuminates larger area compared to torches
Flasks of Oil - Refuel your lantern with 'F' command when it runs out of fuel.
                You want to carry several of those with you.
Torches       - Can be used as light source as well, but you also can throw
                them with 'v' command to deal significant damage
Food Rations  - Eat with 'E' command when you get hungry. Several races
                like vampires or tsukumogami require other methods of satiation.
Shovel        - Wield it and use 'T' command to tunnel through walls. Can be used
                for farming money in early game if you have Scrolls of Treasure Detection.

- Armoury ('2')

Buy some affordable equipment like leather caps, boots, cloaks.
Wear/wield items with 'w' command.
If you're playing as a spellcaster, you will get spellcasting penalties if you
wear gloves. Also, if you have low strength and wear too heavy armor, you will
get penalties to spellcasting and martial art combat.

- Weapon Store ('3')

If you don't have a weapon, you can buy an affordable one for $100-$300.
Short blades (like knives/dagger) cannot be held with both hands, so they're
not recommended for early game.

- Scroll Store ('5')

Scroll of Teleportation   - Use it to escape when surrounded by enemies. Read scrolls with
                            'r' command.
Scroll of Holy Chant      - Use it to become 'blessed', slightly raising your accuracy and AC.
~ of Monster Confusion    - Use it to make the next melee attack you land confuse the enemy.
~ of Treasure Detection   - Read it in the dungeon to detect treasures buried in walls and dig
                            them out with a shovel.

- Magic Store ('6')

Ring of Warning   - Warns you when you're about to walk into a dangerous location
                    (like a hidden trap) if you're wearing it.

- Potion Store ('4')

Potion of Cure Serious Wounds - Slightly recovers HP and cures confusion/stunning when drunk.
                                Buy those with any surplus money you have left. As soon as 
                                you have enough money, you should switch to the superior
                                Potions of Cure Critical Wounds.

- Pawn Shop ('7')

Sells various stuff, but at high price. You're not likely to afford shopping here at this
point, come back when you gather enough money.


Shop inventories change as the game time passes; if you don't like what is being sold right
now, use 'R' command to rest for about 1000 turns.


* Important buildings in Human Village

(In towns, the door symbol '+' depicts the entrance of a building)

Inn                         Close the the eastern entrance

You can rest here for cheap or buy food and drink. Listening to rumors give you some random
basic advice.

Hieda House                 Center area (to the north)

Can identify items for cheap. Gives the Thieves Hideout quest.

Divine Spirit Mausoleum     Southwest

Can transport you to large towns or dungeons you've already visited. Also can recharge
your magic devices. You're going to use it a lot in the future.

Hina Dolls Sales Office     North, outside village walls

You can buy a doll for $100 to remove curses on your equipment and restore drained
experience.

Weaponsmith                 Center area (to the south)

Can enhance weapons/armor and give detailed analysis of your weapon's power.
You don't need it that much in early game.


* 'Look' command

Use 'l' command to look around. Since it's just to get information about your
nearby area, it doesn't take a turn. If you use it, a cursor appears on screen;
move it with arrow keys to look at various things around you. If you point it at
a monster and press 'r', you'll view that monster's name, description, and any of
its special abilites you've learned about. Get used to 'l'ook at anything unfamiliar
appearing in your sight.
Once you get used to the game and learn monster abilities by yourself, you might
simply display a list of all monsters in sight in a separate window.


* Farmer Maggot

A friendly monster called 'Farmer Maggot' might be wandering around the village.
He's strong if you fight him at level 1, but if you buy a lot of torches and keep
throwing them for afar, you should be able to defeat him. He has a high chance to
drop a powerful equipment upon being defeated.

You can't simply attack friendly monster in melee, you instead push past them.
But you can attack by holding Ctrl as you press the arrow key. There's no particular
penalty for defeating them; however, it might affect your future a bit if you're
playing as a stray god.


* Thieves Hideout quest

Enter Hieda house and press 'q' to accept the quest; she wants you to drive away
bandits who have settled in a vacant house. After accepting the quest, a '>' will
appear in a building to the north-west, depicting the quest entrance. If you stand
there and enter with '>', you will go into a special dungeon where you fight four
thieves. Don't forget to prepare your equipment and items before going in.

A powerful character can take them out at level 1. If you use Scrolls of Holy Chant,
Scrolls of Monster Confusion and throw torches, even a weaker class probably can
clear this quest. Defeated monsters can drop items. Pick them up with 'g' to add
them to your inventory.

If you're about to lose, temporarily retreat with '<' while standing on top of
stairs. If you leave a normal quest like that, you will fail it, but you can
attempt quests that open up an exploration base as many times as you like.
However, if you leave, any items lying on the floor will disappear.

If you don't think you can clear it at this point, train for a bit at Dreams
Mausoleum at first.

Once you defeat all of them, a message will appear saying you've completed the
quest. Return to Hieda House, and you'll be able to use that hideout as your
exploration base. Most of the quests follow this 'Accept quest -> Enter special
dungeon -> Defeat all enemies' pattern.


* Identifying items

You should be carrying some new items with you by this point. However, most of the
potions, scrolls, staves, etc. you pick up have some weird names and their true
identity is unknown. You might identify them if you try using them, but it's not a
good idea, since some of them are pretty dangerous. You can identify them at Hieda
House for $25.

While you always know the names of equipment items, some of them might be cursed,
so you shouldn't blindly equip them. Once you identify them, you will learn their
base properties. Even if you can't identify them, if you carry them around with you
for a while, you will get a general feeling about them like 'average' or 'cursed'.
At this point, you can drop off items you don't need.

If you equip a cursed item, you can buy a Scroll of Remove Curse to uncurse it.
(However, there are strong curses that can't be removed with ordinary Remove Curse)

Drop items on the floor with 'd' command.


* Global map

Use the global map mode once you leave the village. Press '<' while you're on surface
and there are no enemies nearby; the screen will switch to a global map depicting
all of Gensoukyou on a single screen.

A single step in that mode is effectively moving from one map edge to the other.
Amount of game time and satiation spent with each step increases proportionally as well.

You can't use many commands while in this mode, but you can check towns/dungeons
with 'l'ook command. Human Village is in the center, Hakurei Shrine is to south-east,
Forest of Magic and Kourindou are to the west, Scarlet Devil Mansion is to the north.
You can go back to normal map with '>' command.

As you move around on global map, you might get ambushed, forcibly returning you
to ordinary map. At that point, you'll be surrounded by enemies, so you can't
immediately return to global map unless you fight or run away. If there are too
many enemies, use a Scroll of Teleportation to escape and run to an edge of the map
to leave the screen. Be careful - if you're not levitating and you walk through
forest terrain, you will move more slowly, making it harder to get away.

The strength of monsters outside depends on global map terrain. Monsters on roads
(white '.') aren't that strong, so keep to the roads in early game. Monsters in
forests (green '#'), mountains (umber '^') and swamps (blue '.') are very strong,
so be very careful when going there.


* Exploring Dreams Mausoleum

Once you leave the Human Village, Myouren Temple is a bit to the south-east.
It has a building where you can buy food $1 and get exploration advice from
Nazrin. There's a dungeon entrance on its map depicted with purple '>'.

This is a dungeon called 'Dreams Mausoleum'.
It's a beginner dungeon with no gimmicks and not many strong enemies.
Once you go deeper inside, you might find valuable gemstones.
If you're not used to the game yet, feel free to raise your level here and
learn about exploration basics.

If you find treasure veins (orange '*'), you can get some money if you wield
a shovel and tunnel with 'T'. Read a Scroll of Treasure Detection to detect
a lot of hidden treasure veins, and gain money by digging them up.


* Dungeon exploration basics

- Dungeon basics

Once you leave a dungeon, all of its levels get reset and will be randomly 
generated once again when you return. If you just go up/down while in a dungeon,
the level layout will be retained.

The game is turn-based, feel free to think before making your move.
In particular, this applies to times when you get into trouble.

Read 'Dungeon exploration' help file for more details.

- Monsters

Various monsters walk around the dungeons.
Generally, monster level matches the dungeon level it starts appearing at.
A level 30 monster is normally encountered starting from dungeon level 30.
If you look at a monster with 'l', if its HP gauge on the left side of screen
is green, it's awake; if gauge is blue, the monster is asleep. If you have
low stealth, monsters are quick to wake up and go after you. Some monsters start
out awake. There are also one of a kind 'unique monster' that are stronger compared
to other monsters of their level.


- Traps and hidden doors

You might end up in a dead end while exploring. In most cases, there's a hidden
door nearby. Press 's' key several times at a location that looks suspicious.

Also, sometimes there are traps on the floor or chests lying around. If you
carelessly open a chest or step on the floor, you will trigger the trap.
You can discover a trap on a chest by identifying it or pressing 's' several times
after you put it down on the floor.
In order to detect floor traps, switch to searching mode with 'S' command,
use devices of Trap Detection or wear a Ring of Warning. Searching mode effectively
makes you perform 's' command with each step you take, but you spend twice as much
time as well. It's automatically cancelled if there are enemies nearby.

Chance to detect hidden things while searching is determined by you Searching skill.
If it's high enough, you can detect hidden things by walking around even without
searching.


* Dangerous monsters in very early game

Large brown snake               Umber 'J'   Level 1

Comparatively high attack power and defense for a level 1 enemy. Moves slowly.

Giant white mouse               White 'r'   Level 1

Quickly multiplies if you leave it alone. Dangerous if you get surrounded.

Insect swarm                    Umber 'I'   Level 1

Low HP, but moves quickly and hits hard.

Bandit                          Grey 'p'    Level 8

Two of those appear in Thieves Hideout quest.
Strong for low level players, so handle them with caution.

Freesia                         Umber 'f'   Level 2

Beginner killer that is well-known even in the original version.
If your level is low, run away instead of fighting it.